Docker is an open-source platform that enables you to build, package, and run applications in isolated environments called containers.
A container is a lightweight, portable, and self-sufficient unit that includes:
Application code
Runtime (e.g., Python, Node.js)
Libraries and dependencies
Configuration files

Container holds bare minimumOS which serves the applications
It bare minimum OS, application run time, dependencies and packagas,code


image is file which old set of commands and storage
image ----> container
container is the running instance of image
docker ps:
---------
checks the running containers
docker images:
-------------
displays 

The docker ps command is a Docker CLI command used to list running containers on a system. By default, it displays a table with details about each running container, including:
CONTAINER ID: A unique identifier for the container.
IMAGE: The Docker image used to create the container.
COMMAND: The command executed when the container starts.
CREATED: When the container was created.
STATUS: The current status (e.g., "Up 2 hours" or "Exited").
PORTS: Any ports exposed or mapped to the host.
NAMES: The name assigned to the container.
Syntax
docker ps [OPTIONS]
Common Options
-a, --all: Show all containers (including stopped ones), not just running ones.
-q, --quiet: Display only container IDs.
--format: Customize output format using Go templates (e.g., docker ps --format "{{.ID}} {{.Names}}")
-n <number>: Show the last n containers (e.g., docker ps -n 5).
-l, --latest: Show the most recently created container.
--no-trunc: Prevent truncation of output (e.g., full container IDs).
Example Usage
List running containers:
docker ps
Output might look like:
CONTAINER ID   IMAGE         COMMAND                  CREATED        STATUS        PORTS                    NAMES
ab1c2d3e4f5g   nginx:latest  "/docker-entrypoint.…"   10 minutes ago Up 10 minutes 0.0.0.0:80->80/tcp       my-nginx
List all containers (running and stopped):
docker ps -a
List only container IDs:
docker ps -q
Output:
ab1c2d3e4f5g
Custom output format:
docker ps --format "Container: {{.Names}}, Image: {{.Image}}"
Output:
Container: my-nginx, Image: nginx:latest
Notes
docker ps only shows containers on the current Docker host.
If no containers are running, the command returns an empty table (or nothing with -q).
Use docker ps to quickly check the status of containers or troubleshoot issues like port conflicts.
For more details, run:
docker ps --help
docker ps: checks the running containers
--------
docker images: displays the images available in server
-------------
docker pull: it pulls the image from docker repositiry which is called docker hub
-----------
docker create: it will create container from image
-------------
docker start: docker start conatinerID will start the container
---------------
docker run: it will pull,create and start the container from image
-----------
docker file: is used to buid custome images, we can make use of docker instructions to create a custome images
-----------
run         Create and run a new container from an image
  exec        Execute a command in a running container
  ps          List containers
  build       Build an image from a Dockerfile
  bake        Build from a file
  pull        Download an image from a registry
  push        Upload an image to a registry
  images      List images
  login       Authenticate to a registry
  logout      Log out from a registry
  search      Search Docker Hub for images
  version     Show the Docker version information
  info        Display system-wide information
 
 FROM: sets the base image for subsequent instructions, There is excepton ARG
 -----
 RUN: excutes a command in a new layer and commits the result: like installing packages, it runs at the time of image building
-------

